a science for you math
special with dr thomas crawford
from tom rox maths
so for this month of january
it is maths month on the science for you
youtube channel
so today i've got this very special
guest
from the tom rock's maths youtube
channel
and if you watch numberphile you may
also
see him from there tom has got his phd
in applied mathematics
so and i'm very lucky that he's agreed
to speak to me today so
hopefully technology works he will
appear
wonderful as if as if by magic as if by
magic i have appeared
wonderful so for the podcast listeners
tom has we this morning we well
not this morning but earlier on we had
some slight technical issues with
with the sound but now we've got
we've managed and we've come through
yes so um do you want to tell everybody
what your
phd is in
absolutely so as as you said
in the introduction jack my phd is in
applied maths
and so i studied at the university of
cambridge for four years
in the department of applied maths and
theoretical physics
is the department name but i was just
doing actual applied maths i am not
claiming to know anything
at all about theoretical physics they're
just for some reason we're all grouped
in the same department
my particular area was fluid dynamics
so this is trying to understand the
movement and the behavior of fluids
and when i say fluids here we mean
something
that changes shape to fit the container
that you put it inside so this will be
any gas really any liquid and even some
things that you might think
are solids so ice for example can
actually be modeled and understood
by the same equations the navier-stokes
equations that we use for water and for
air
and other things and the project i was
looking at i was doing experiments
i was actually did some field work and
went on a ship for
for six weeks at sea which is very
exciting
and i was doing a project looking at the
interaction between
um river outflows and the ocean
so the idea being that when a river
flows into the ocean
you have fresh water from the river
which is
lighter than the salt water in the ocean
and so there's a difference of buoyancy
which creates all kinds of forces and
kinds of
physics comes into the model and we were
trying to
understand that process and try to be
able to make predictions for example
about where
river water may end up within the ocean
system
with the main application being
pollution because lots of pollution
comes from rivers
and enters the ocean so if we can
understand what's going on there it
helps us
have a better chance of cleaning up our
oceans
so you you do experiments in your maths
sort of thing which it takes away
quite a lot of what people think of
maths
of it being just sat down doing
sums which i think is
one of the main problems with what
people think about maths
is it's just a sort of thing you
you get out your textbook and you're
copying out equations and
learning things like that but it's not
as
what exactly yeah now there's um
so i was quite fortunate i think really
because my project
asked for three main just so it was
sitting down
reading textbooks doing some solving
equations
that was the sort of i call it the
office part of my
phd so that was me starting my office
doing math solving equations
um but then because i was doing my
experiment lap i actually go down to
there's an underground
um maths laboratory in cambridge it
kind of kind of looks like uh like a
spread look or something because it's
all underground and you have to go down
all of these steps and enter key codes
and things to get in
it's a really cool place and i would you
know
split my time depending on what i felt
during that particular day
between solving sums and equations in
the office and going down to the lab and
doing experiments
and then the third area while i
mentioned briefly mentioned i was
fortunate enough to be able to go to sea
and spend six weeks on this ship
collecting actual data from the ocean
to then compare to my experiments and
also to compare to the the theoretical
models and the equations so there was
quite a mixture of different things in
involved in your phd doing
different sorts of maths
exactly and like um as you mentioned
it's something i like to emphasize with
my research was the fact that
i'm a mathematician and yet i'm doing
experiments i'm getting my hands dirty
as it were or wet because i was working
with a giant fish tank um
and we also had one one of the cool
things that we actually had in the lab
um was a salt water tap so we had the
normal taps which would have feed in
fresh water just like your taps at home
and then there was another tap supplied
by a separate pipe which would feed in
salt water
and this wasn't just any old about
a hundred times saltier than the ocean
so it was like the saltiest salt water
you could
possibly imagine so sometimes when
filling the tank
if you because it would have a hose pipe
and i'd use this to fill up my my sort
of meter cubed fish tank
everywhere and like this stuff was so
salty that when the water dried on my
clothes my clothes would be like covered
in salt
like you'd see all the crystals form and
everything so that was something
um really cool about the lab and the
setup and i really enjoyed doing the
experiments as well
i found that it gave me like a break
from from sort of trying to solve the
theoretical
equations because i'm sure we've all
been there when you're trying to solve a
maths problem
you kind of get stuck um and it's kind
of becomes all-consuming it's all you
think about is trying to solve this
problem
and i really enjoyed the fact that
i was able to sort of take a step back
but still do something productive
by going to the lab and doing some
experiments because i did i think over
500 experiments in total
uh during my phd and each one took a
couple of hours so i did do a lot of
experiments um over several years
and i really enjoyed that i could sort
of switch between those two things
because while i was going down and still
being
productive and doing experiments
the the problem i was stuck with would
still be like
percolating through my head and
subconsciously without realizing it i'd
kind of be figuring it out
so when i'd go back and sit down often
i'd sort of know what to do
it's like the classic story of like you
know you solve your math problems when
you're in the shower or when you're
driving or riding your bike when you're
not really thinking about them
you often get those moments of
brilliance to help you solve the problem
so another question i'm i'm going to ask
you now is
um that i'm sure some people will be uh
wondering what do now you've completed
your phd and your
research work and what do you do
now because you're no longer at
cambridge in our talks
but that so what what's your job in
tablet oxford
so i have um here in oxford
um so i i teach
at the university so i have at the
moment about
20 or 30 students so first year and
second year undergraduates
and i teach them all kinds of subjects
from
linear algebra and group theory which
i'm doing with my first year students at
the moment
my second years we're just finishing off
complex analysis
and then we're going to start some fluid
dynamics in fact my my favorite and some
quantum theory which i also really enjoy
um so i so i spent a lot of my time
teaching
that's in some way you can think of that
as perhaps half of my job
would be the easiest way to sort of
think about it um
and then when i'm not teaching so my
official title is i am a
an early career fellow in teaching and
outreach
and so what that means is i as i say
approximately half my time is spent
teaching
and the other half is doing
communication and outreach work about
maths
so in a normal year shall we say or in a
pre-coronavirus year
uh that would be lots of talks in
schools yeah so um
i think in 2019 i did over 100
talks in schools so i'd go to the school
um you know visit
the math class or maybe in the assembly
hall uh with everyone present and i
talk about the mass of sport or um
maybe i had to talk a little bit about
my research on cleaning up the ocean
cleaning up ocean pollution and we'd
have a discussion about some really
interesting applications of maths
outside of the classroom i always a lot
of the
uh i was gonna say um i think
a lot of people don't see the real world
application of maths i think it really
needs to be
more emphasize that maths isn't just
something that you get at your gcses
then go to
college and do whatever you do in there
and leave maths behind
maths is really something that you can
apply
to the real world in real situations
absolutely and a lot of the the work
that i do with this
outreach position is emphasizing this
either to
to students at school or even to i do
lots of talks at science festivals
for example all my youtube videos and
things all of that is actually now part
of my actual job
be sort of so half my time is teaching
and half is is doing this outreach
work um i i should say this is not a
standard
position this is very unique because of
i guess my skill set and and what i
do with tom rock's maths a sort of more
standard academic position you would
spend about half your time
doing teaching and then the other half
usually would be spent doing research
so if i for example once i finished my
phd
i could have carried on with that
project yeah so so i reached a certain
point where i stopped and submitted my
thesis
after four years um but there's still a
lot more work to be done so if i'd
carried on with research i'd
still be investigating this river ocean
problem and and still working on that
but i kind of switched to to this
working outreach because as you say
i think it's really important to to
emphasize to people just how applicable
how amazing
and versatile mass can be like we're
seeing it now
with with the pandemic all of this talk
of mathematical models and we're really
seeing
just how versatile and useful and
valuable
all of these models are in helping
governments to make decisions
yeah because it really it really does
influence
our decisions of infection rates and
everything else which she did make a
video on working out the
uh model of the virus my dog's just
entered in his
stuff okay you're coming to say hello
what that noise is
i think he's just been taken out of the
room now
so oh where was that oh yes um
so my next thing i want to ask you about
is for young people
what sort of careers are there in maths
to go down because there's the
teaching line that you could go down
half of what your job is and then
there's some sort of research
along with sort of the science
so what other careers are there in maths
great question the the answer is you can
kind of do anything you want
in in in all maybe maybe not be a doctor
because you probably have to study
medicine not matters if you want to be a
doctor
or a lawyer or something you know
something very specific where you need a
certain degree
like law and medicine of course you
can't do those probably
though you could do a conversion course
i know some friends who did
but um no you can do anything with math
so you really can i think
something i've seen with with my
students you know i've been teaching
students now for just over three years
and when they graduate
like they go on to do the widest range
of things you can possibly think of
so of course some of them continue to
study go on to do maybe master's degrees
or phds
some of them have trained to be teachers
either in school
or after you've done your phd then maybe
you could teach at university
um as i do i've seen quite a lot of them
will go to work in the city
so like an office job whether that's in
um finance
in in some cases or in consultancy it's
also a very popular one
um but the the main thing
is the the skills that you're taught
in a maths degree and by being a
mathematician are incredibly valuable
to employers and employers know this so
so they sort of
one of the top degrees that an employer
you know if you say to an employer which
degree would you like
um you know your your employees to have
taken
a very very large number of them will
say maths
yeah because it teaches you problem
solving
the entire maths is problem solving
it is logical thinking yeah
it teaches you logical thinking so so
when you're doing like
solving a math problem each line in your
solution
has to follow from the one before it
yeah
and so that's like logical thinking
deductions
and things so i think and then it also
teaches you to be quite creative
this is something that i think not many
people
who aren't who don't do perhaps don't
study much maths that don't really
realize
is that to solve a maths problem you
have to be incredibly creative
especially when you're studying at
university because
and i find this with my students there's
often several ways of solving a problem
it's not the case of here is the
question here is the one way to solve it
and then you get the answer yeah of
course the answer the answer is always
there's always just one answer that's
what i like about maths you know if
you're right or you're wrong because
you know what the answer has to be but
there are like 10
maybe even more different ways of
getting to that
no i was i i just finished by saying
that um
i was i was talking about about the
creativity the creative aspect of
solving a maths problem
um and then just sort of summarize by
saying
you you know you're being taught problem
solved skills
logical deduction through creativity and
creative thinking
so all of these are really really
valuable skills that any employer would
want
so that's kind of why you can you can
sort of argue as someone who studied
math that you have all of these skills
and can really do any job that you want
right so i've got so we've not got long
left
i did i planned for it to be a bit
longer
but we've not got long left because i'm
trying to keep it in a 20 minute
time bracket so um
some quick fire questions
sounds fun who's your favorite
mathematician
favorite mathematician oiler it's not
very original but
uh every topic that i study every topic
that i teach
there is always something named after
euler the
the man did he just studied everything
and not just like a little bit like he
made
lasting contributions to almost every
area of maths and that's just amazing
so he has to be the favorite favorite
scientist
favorite scientist oh this is a good one
um i really like richard feynman
i was just about to say if you hadn't
have said richard
i think i've had to delete the video
um because i mean yeah like
brilliant brilliant mind brilliant mind
and just really interesting person
i think i think anyone who brings a
personality
to their work as well as obviously being
good at their work is
is a real is a breath of fresh air well
he was he he just
changed all the stereotypes of
any scientist before him uh
favorite number favorite number
uh e so euler's number um so i have this
i have this tattooed on my arm
here hopefully you can see oh e equals
so i have the first 120 digits uh
tattooed on my arm
of e because it's my favorite number
next question what's run out of
questions
what favorite equation
favorite equation same thing it's got to
be navier stokes
which i also have tattooed down my side
here i'll try and get it
i think you can see a little bit of it
on the screen there oh yes
so uh yeah this this was revealed in the
number file video as well where you can
see it more clearly
um but yeah so navier stokes because i
study
fluid dynamics um it's sort of you know
i studied it for four years
big part of my life and this this is the
equation that governs all the fluid
dynamics so it had to be my favorite
two last questions before we end
so what advice would you
give to younger people possibly watching
this video
who want to get into maths
and want to go down a career in mass
what advice would you give to them
to help them possibly even go and study
at oxford or cambridge okay
my main bit of advice is to um
make be exposed to as wide a range as
maths as possible
so um of course you you're going to need
to work hard at school you're going to
need to to study and you're going to
need to
make sure you understand everything
you're being taught but at the same time
like go out and search for other things
that are interesting
so watch youtube videos for example like
you know
my channel or even better number five or
three blue one brown
watch those videos you don't need to
understand what's happening
but just by trying your best to follow
along at least the general idea
most of the videos are designed so that
not everyone can follow of course but
the vast majority of people
with a mathematical mind and a
mathematical interest
should be able to follow at least the
key ideas
in in any of those videos so try that
and just see and if you find a
particular topic you enjoy
say maybe your your stumble across a
video to do with let's say group theory
or number theory
or something and you think oh that was
really interesting
then do further like not research but
like look more of that stuff up
again you're not trying to like study it
to be able to to
explain it or understand it but just
making yourself
exposed to it it kind of you'll be
amazed that
just just having those ideas going into
your mind and trying to
understand them in your own way really
helps you to develop
your ability to think as a mathematician
well i know i know with reading
in search of schrodinger's cat
the book about quantum mechanics and the
famous schrodinger's equation
yeah it's a quite a difficult book
the concepts but you always go away with
something even if it's something only
very small that you've learned
through that and then you know what you
can go
out further and then go and look look at
and then the last very last question
is it's a tricky one what advice
would you give to your younger self
oh what advice would what advice would i
give
to my younger self um
that is a tricky one because i think
i i always worked very hard at school
i i always worked hard and and you know
studied really hard for my exams
um to because i had this goal of wanting
to study at oxford and then once i was
at oxford i then worked really hard once
i was here to make sure i got a first
class degree
because i wanted to do a phd so i think
i've always had a very good
work ethic and and of always um
but i guess maybe something that i've
begun to realize now now that i'm
working in this kind
of communication outreach area um
i'm beginning to see the value in in
doing a subject
um purely for enjoyment
so i think if i had any advice in my
younger self it perhaps would be
um to have tried to find
more so like i'm doing now and really
enjoying
finding areas that i'm not learning
about
just like because i need to learn about
them for the purposes of an exam or to
understand something
but like learning about maths just
because it's really cool maths
and i'm having a lot of fun just like
trying to solve this puzzle
or trying to understand this particular
bit for example i'm i'm doing
i'm teaching myself some advanced
quantum theory i say teaching myself i'm
obviously following
some some of the university lectures and
and problem sheets and things
um and that's purely just because i
really like to learn some advanced
quantum theory there is no real end goal
it's just kind of i find quantum theory
fascinating
and it's something that i really want to
learn so i think maybe
it would have been nice perhaps to my
younger self to tell my younger self to
do more of that earlier on
because now i'm realizing it's so much
fun
i think it's one of the things that um
people that schools don't
put across enough that yeah it's not
just about learning this that and the
other
for this end of your exam that will then
set you in good stead it's also about
it's good to learn those things because
it will help you
exactly yeah both of them are important
but it's also about
enjoying what you're doing because
there's no point in
the you're not going to learn anything
if you just hate it
i agree i agree that's yeah that is the
key to it if you enjoy something
then you do a better job of it i think
so
it's about finding finding the type of
math that you enjoy
or finding the the way to explain a
certain concept or the way a concept is
explained that makes sense to you
because it's enjoyable i think is really
key
so thank you very much um for
agreeing to do this about that no
problem at all
it's been good fun thank you very much
no problem jack thank you for having me
that was
a science for you special with
dr thomas crawford from
tom rocks maths please remember to like
share
and subscribe thank you for watching